Curriculum Metrics (your custom callbacks)

  These are the metrics your OpponentProgressionCallback logs. They measure how well the agent plays the actual game.

  curriculum/construction_phase

  What it is: Which stage of scaffolding the agent is in. Scaffolding means pre-filling part of the board from your board library
   so the agent only has to learn to place the remaining pieces. Phase 0 = "place just the goal," phase 1 = "place goal + 1 more
  piece from scratch," etc.

  Your graph: Flat at 0 the entire time. This means construction scaffolding was either skipped or completed instantly. The agent
   went straight into opponent training.

  curriculum/in_construction

  What it is: Binary flag (0 or 1). 1 = still in the construction curriculum, 0 = moved on to opponent curriculum.

  Your graph: Flat at 0. Confirms the agent is fully past construction and in opponent training for the entire visible run.

  curriculum/opponent_phase

  What it is: Which opponent difficulty tier the agent is currently training against. Your code builds a progressive curriculum
  from board pool files - phase 0 is the simplest opponents, higher phases mix in harder opponent boards. The agent advances when
   it hits 70% win rate + 90% valid rate.

  Your graph: Staircase pattern jumping from 0 up to 6. Each step is a phase transition - the agent proved competency and got
  promoted. The rapid early jumps (0->6 in ~500k steps) then flat line at 6 for the remaining ~1.3M steps tells you the agent
  handled early difficulties well but is now plateaued at phase 6.

  curriculum/game_win_rate

  What it is: The fraction of evaluation games the agent wins. Measured by your callback running 20 deterministic games (the
  agent picks its best action, no randomness) every eval_freq steps.

  Your graph: Oscillating between ~0.38 and ~0.55, centered around 0.45-0.50. To advance to phase 7, this needs to hit 0.70. The
  agent is competitive but not dominant against phase-6 opponents. The lack of upward trend after 1M+ steps suggests it may need
  more timesteps, hyperparameter tuning, or a different approach to break through.

  curriculum/valid_rate

  What it is: The fraction of boards the agent builds that are valid (playable) - meaning they have a legal path from start to
  goal. An invalid board is one where the pieces don't form a completable game.

  Your graph: Consistently 94-100%, currently 97.8%. Excellent. The agent has thoroughly learned the rules of board construction
  for size 4.

  curriculum/avg_reward

  What it is: Mean total reward (cumulative sum of all reward signals) per evaluation episode. Reward is the numerical signal
  your environment gives the agent after each action - positive for good actions (winning rounds, valid boards, reaching new
  rows) and negative for bad ones (losing, invalid boards).

  Your graph: Oscillating wildly between roughly -15 and +25. The high variance is expected since game outcomes (win/loss/tie
  across 5 rounds) have inherent randomness. The center of oscillation being near 0-5 (slightly positive) aligns with the ~50%
  win rate.

  ---
  Train Metrics (PPO internals)

  These come from the PPO algorithm (Proximal Policy Optimization) itself. PPO is the specific RL algorithm you're using - it
  trains two neural networks: a policy network (decides what action to take) and a value network (estimates how much total future
   reward to expect).

  train/approx_kl

  Term: KL divergence (Kullback-Leibler divergence) - a mathematical measure of how different two probability distributions are.
  Here it measures how much the policy (the agent's action-selection strategy) changed after one round of training updates.

  What it means: After each batch of experience, PPO updates the neural network weights. approx_kl measures how far the new
  policy drifted from the old one. Too high (>0.05) = updates are too aggressive, the agent might "forget" what it learned. Too
  low (<0.001) = updates are too timid, learning is slow.

  Your graph: Fluctuating between 0.003 and 0.004. This is in the healthy sweet spot. The policy is updating meaningfully but not
   recklessly.

  train/clip_fraction

  Term: Clipping - PPO's core innovation. It prevents the policy from changing too much in a single update by "clipping"
  (capping) the ratio of new-policy-probability to old-policy-probability. If the ratio exceeds the clip range, the gradient is
  zeroed out for that sample.

  What it means: clip_fraction is the percentage of training samples where clipping actually activated. High clip fraction (>0.3)
   = the policy is trying to change a lot and getting constrained. Low (<0.01) = policy is barely changing.

  Your graph: ~1.6-2.4%. Low and stable. The policy is making modest, well-behaved updates. This is normal for a maturing agent -
   early in training you'd expect higher clip fractions as the policy makes bigger jumps.

  train/clip_range

  What it is: The hyperparameter that controls how much the policy ratio can deviate before clipping kicks in. Set to 0.2 (the
  PPO default), meaning the new policy probability can be at most 1.2x or at least 0.8x the old probability for any given action.

  Your graph: Flat line at 0.2. This is just confirming your hyperparameter isn't being annealed (some implementations reduce it
  over time). Nothing to monitor here.

  train/entropy_loss

  Term: Entropy - a measure of randomness/uncertainty in the policy's action choices. High entropy = the agent spreads
  probability across many actions (exploring). Low entropy = the agent is very confident in one action (exploiting).

  What it means: PPO adds an entropy bonus to the loss function to encourage exploration. entropy_loss is the negative entropy
  (it's a "loss" the optimizer tries to minimize, but since it's negative, minimizing it means maximizing entropy/exploration).
  Your ent_coef=0.05 controls how heavily this term is weighted.

  Your graph: Around -0.76 to -0.80. Moderate entropy - the agent has learned preferences but hasn't fully collapsed to
  deterministic behavior. If this went to near 0, the agent would be "too certain" and might get stuck in a local optimum. The
  slight downward trend (more negative = more entropy) suggests the agent is actually increasing exploration slightly, possibly
  because phase 6 opponents require more varied strategies.

  train/explained_variance

  Term: Explained variance - measures how well the value network (the "critic") predicts actual returns. Ranges from -inf to 1.0.
   A value of 1.0 means perfect predictions. 0.0 means the value network is no better than just predicting the mean. Negative
  means it's worse than the mean (actively misleading).

  What it means: The value network's job is to estimate "how much total reward will I get from this state onward?" Good
  predictions help PPO compute better advantage estimates (how much better/worse an action was compared to expectation), which
  makes policy updates more accurate.

  Your graph: Fluctuating between 0.05 and 0.35, centered around 0.20-0.25. This is mediocre. The value network is only
  explaining ~25% of the variance in actual returns. For comparison, well-trained agents often reach 0.7-0.9. This is likely
  because size-4 boards have a large state space and game outcomes are inherently stochastic (opponent board is random). The
  value network is struggling to predict outcomes reliably. This is the weakest metric in your training.

  train/learning_rate

  What it is: The learning rate - how big a step the optimizer takes when adjusting neural network weights. Higher = bigger jumps
   = faster learning but risk of instability. Lower = smaller, safer steps.

  Your graph: Flat at 1e-4 (0.0001). You set --learning-rate 1e-4. Not being annealed. Nothing to monitor.

  train/loss

  Term: Loss - the total number the optimizer is trying to minimize. It combines the policy loss (how to improve action
  selection), value loss (how to improve reward prediction), and entropy loss (exploration bonus). Lower is generally better, but
   the absolute number isn't very meaningful since these components are on different scales.

  Your graph: Oscillating between 180-320, centered around 250. The high values are dominated by the value_loss component (see
  below). The variance is high because game outcomes are stochastic. Not trending downward, which aligns with the plateau at
  phase 6.

  train/policy_gradient_loss

  Term: Policy gradient - the core mechanism of policy optimization. The "gradient" is the mathematical direction the network
  weights should move to make good actions more probable and bad actions less probable. The policy gradient loss quantifies how
  much improvement the policy can still make given current experience.

  What it means: Negative values mean the policy found actions that were better than expected (positive advantage) and is
  reinforcing them. More negative = stronger improvement signal. Values near zero = the policy is already close to optimal for
  its current experience.

  Your graph: Hovering around -0.010 to -0.011. Small but consistently negative - the agent is still finding marginal
  improvements each update. The fact that it's not trending toward zero is encouraging; the agent hasn't completely stagnated.

  train/value_loss

  Term: Value loss - the mean squared error (MSE) between the value network's predictions and the actual observed returns. The
  value network predicted "I'll get X reward" and actually got Y; the loss is (X - Y)^2 averaged over the batch.

  What it means: Lower = better predictions. High value loss means the value network is making large prediction errors. This
  directly harms training because PPO relies on good value estimates to compute advantages.

  Your graph: 580-750, centered around 650. Very high. This is the root cause of your low explained_variance. The value network
  simply can't accurately predict outcomes in this environment. This makes sense: size-4 boards have a huge state space, games
  have 5 rounds with stochastic opponent boards, and the reward signal has high variance. This is the metric I'd focus on if you
  want to improve training - potentially by using a larger network, different learning rate for the value function, or reward
  normalization.

  ---
  Eval Metrics (MaskableEvalCallback)

  These come from SB3's built-in MaskableEvalCallback, which runs 5 deterministic evaluation episodes periodically. Note: this is
   a different eval from your curriculum callback's 20-episode eval.

  eval/mean_ep_length

  Term: Episode - one complete game (all 5 rounds of board construction + simulation). Episode length = total number of timesteps
   (individual actions) taken in that episode.

  Your graph: Oscillating 53-65, centered ~58. Relatively stable. Each episode takes about 58 actions, which for 5 rounds of
  size-4 board construction is reasonable (~11-12 actions per round).

  eval/mean_reward

  What it is: Average total reward across the 5 eval episodes. Same concept as curriculum/avg_reward but measured by a different
  callback with different episodes.

  Your graph: Extremely volatile, ranging from -170 to +45. The huge swings are because only 5 episodes are used (small sample
  size) and game outcomes are binary (big win reward vs big loss penalty). The wide variance means this metric is noisy and
  unreliable as a signal - your curriculum callback's 20-episode average is more trustworthy.

  ---
  Rollout Metrics

  Term: Rollout - the phase where the agent collects experience by actually playing the game. PPO alternates between rollout
  (play games, collect data) and training (update neural networks using collected data). Each rollout collects n_steps worth of
  experience across all parallel envs.

  rollout/ep_len_mean

  What it is: Average episode length across all 4 parallel training environments during rollout. Unlike eval (which uses
  deterministic actions), rollout uses stochastic actions (the agent samples from its probability distribution, sometimes picking
   suboptimal actions for exploration).

  Your graph: 55-58, gradually settling. Very similar to eval episode lengths, which tells you the agent's exploratory behavior
  doesn't dramatically change episode structure.

  rollout/ep_rew_mean

  What it is: Average episode reward during rollout (training games). Since these use stochastic actions, rewards are typically
  lower than deterministic eval.

  Your graph: Around -15 to -35, trending slightly more negative over time. This is expected because the curriculum advanced -
  the agent is now facing phase-6 opponents (harder) so it gets lower rewards during training. The rollout reward being negative
  while curriculum avg_reward is positive is because rollout includes exploration (random suboptimal actions) while curriculum
  eval is deterministic.

  ---
  TensorBoard UI Terms

  A few terms you'll see in the legend below each graph:

  - Run: The name of this training run (MaskablePPO_3 = your 4th run, zero-indexed)
  - Value: The raw (unsmoothed) most recent data point
  - Smoothed: Exponentially smoothed value (reduces noise to show trends - controlled by the smoothing slider in TensorBoard)
  - Step: The training timestep (total environment actions taken across all envs) at which the value was recorded

  ---
  Overall Assessment

  The training is functional but plateaued. The agent mastered construction (98% valid) and blew through phases 0-5, but has been
   stuck at phase 6 for over 1M steps. The core bottleneck is the value network (explained_variance ~0.25, value_loss ~650) - it
  can't accurately predict game outcomes in the large size-4 state space, which limits how effectively PPO can improve the
  policy.

  Options to break through the plateau:
  1. More timesteps - sometimes 2M isn't enough for size 4; try 5-10M
  2. Larger network - the default MLP may be too small; try net_arch=[256, 256] or [512, 256]
  3. Separate value learning rate - sometimes the value network benefits from a higher LR
  4. Reward normalization - wrapping the env with VecNormalize can help stabilize value estimates

  ❯ here's the thing - this is run with resume - so initially we took 10M steps to get through construction and the first
  phases - then we updated the training script to let us resume from where it left off and basically start at phase 6 - so
  blowing through construction and phase 0-5 is misleading since we used the final model from MaskablePPO_2 to start from, I
   think

● That makes total sense - let me check the full picture across runs.

● Read 1 file (ctrl+o to expand)

● Bash(python -c "
      from tensorboard.backend.event_processing.event_accumulator import EventAccumulator…)
  ⎿  === MaskablePPO_1 ===
       Steps: 2,000 -> 6,294,000 (3147 points)
       curriculum/opponent_phase: start=0.00 -> end=0.00
     … +20 lines (ctrl+o to expand)

● That confirms it. Here's the real story across all three runs:

  MaskablePPO_1 (6.3M steps): Got through construction phases 0->8, exited construction mode, but never advanced past opponent
  phase 0. Ended at 50% win rate.

  MaskablePPO_2 (10M steps): Re-did construction 0->8, then climbed opponent phases 0->6. Also ended at 50% win rate once it hit
  phase 6.

  MaskablePPO_3 (2M steps so far): Resumed from MaskablePPO_2's final model with --start-opponent-phase 6. Has been at phase 6
  the entire time, hovering at 45-50% win rate.

  So the real picture is: the agent has been stuck at opponent phase 6 with ~50% win rate for roughly 12M steps combined (the
  tail end of run 2 + all of run 3). The phase 0-5 "staircase" you see in run 3's graph is just the callback re-evaluating and
  quickly re-confirming those phases at startup - the agent already knew that material.

  This is a genuine plateau, not an early-training artifact. The agent can build valid size-4 boards reliably (98%+) and beat
  phases 0-5, but phase 6 opponents are a real wall. The 50% win rate means it's evenly matched - not bad, but it needs 70% to
  advance.

  Given the high value_loss and low explained_variance persisting across 12M+ total steps, the bottleneck is likely structural
  (network capacity or reward signal quality) rather than just needing more time.
